Last thing we left off on... We looked, we could cut it. We can start over on
some... Yeah, we just got through talking about that. Can I ask a question about
the Dream Master? Sure. I think it was originally He Who Shakes. Right. The
story, okay. Yeah. You mentioned somewhere that Render, of course it's obvious
in the story too, that Render has a flaw. Would his flaw be hubris, pride, in
thinking he can pull off what he's trying to do? That was my original intention,
yes, in the shorter version. It might have — when I expanded it to book length
it might have gotten a bit more diffuse because of the various things that were
interpolated. But basically, yes, that was what I had in mind.
To harken back to the so-called new wave style, you have a whiz-bang scientist
in the grand tradition of Campbell person who has marvelous abilities with the
neural participation Right.
Yeah.
Neural participation therapist. Right. Who has great abilities as a neural
participation therapist. But he has this one flaw and that's where your story
departs from what would be called a so-called standard science fiction story.
And I think really what makes it a very interesting story in the fact that he
gets drawn in by his own ego and that eventually is his downfall. Yeah, that was
what I had in mind. He was good, obviously, and the
situation he undertook to resolve was really beyond him or beyond any therapist.
There were other contributing factors, gradual infatuation with his patients and
everything, but basically his reason for doing it was hubris.
So it was not a traditional science fiction story in the Campbell sense. My
focus was on more on character, whereas the Campbell sort of story, it was one
of these things Kingsley Amos who called the place where the idea is the hero
rather than the people in the story. So I was just...
Why don't we go into road marks? Do we have some questions on that one? Yeah, I
have one more on this one, which we may just whack out because it's kind of
dumb. Because I don't understand Jungian psychology myself. But you used some
Jungian psychology in this story. Is that not correct? Yes, that's right. Well,
as I mentioned, I was a psychology major as an undergraduate for a period of
time. And getting
away from themes and standards and values and all that, and looking at it from a
purely practical standpoint, when I began writing, I
knew a lot about mythology. My first book, This Immortal, drew upon that
background because that was the easiest thing for me to do, to create my first
book. When it came time to do my second one, I didn't want to do exactly the
same sort of things I had done in my first one. And in thinking about it, the
next large body of information I possessed did involve psychology. And it was
for that reason that I developed the sort of character I did in Dream Master, my
second book, and apart from the way that psychological theory worked in the book
itself, that was one of the practical reasons I used that sort of thing for that
book.
But yes, here I was doing more in the way
that psychological theory looks at myth than I was in just looking at it in
general as a story.
Yeah, that's about all I can think to say on that one. Do you want to go ahead
and move on to David?
No, that's okay.
Yeah.
Why don't you go ahead and I'll chime in. Okay, you or me. Doesn't matter. Me
either. You or me. The Three Stooges over here.
A lot of writers tend to avoid—OK, let me start. A lot of the harder science
fiction writers tend to avoid some of the time travel stories because of the
fantasy element that almost has to be present there because of things like
grandfather paradox and things that you can't very well explain. I guess with
your fantasy background and things that you're doing, It was an attractive
alternative for you, was it? I have always attempted to avoid time travel
stories because I don't like the paradoxes involved. In fact, the only thing I
can think of that I had done in the past was a short story called Divine
Madness. I said that I really wouldn't write a time travel story unless I came
up with a new gimmick.
and, well, for Roadmarks, I thought I had something just in the image of time
considered as a superhighway, basically, and with outs for the paradoxes in an
Everett Wheeler parallel world sort of situation, and it was really the image of
the road that fascinated me and led to my writing that particular book. But
normally I avoid time travel. I think you had something rather interesting in
here in that your time travel story really focuses on the travelers and who they
are and what they're doing rather than the places that they're traveling to.
And, of course, the problem that the protagonist has that he's been put it a
contract has been put out against him and a person has 10 chances to kill him
during this contract and his various ways of getting around these ten attempts
on his life but really they weren't like traveling back to ancient China to do
something it was more of a story about the traveler and what was happening to
him rather than what it would be called about a traditional time travel story.
Yeah, that was my intention, really.
I didn't have anything that elaborate that I wanted to do at any particular
point in history that I wanted to focus on it and draw in all sorts of cultural
materials and try to create a true picture of a culture from the past. it was
more the device itself of traveling on the road and the different things that
followed once the situation was set up. That sort of allows you to avoid some of
those paradoxes too, doesn't it? Yes, yes. and the way I broke the story itself
down structurally
was intended once the reader caught on to what was going on to make it a little
clearer and at the same time to try to give the impression
of the time situation that prevailed. Following the main character in all the
chapters, Title I and all the twos being asynchronous, some could precede the
others really since they were off the road or passing on the road at different
points. Um,
yes, I got the idea for that book, uh, here in New Mexico, really, uh, one
Sunday I was just out for a drive on, um, I-25, which is a nice, uh, highway
type road. took a turn off and drove for a few minutes. And the road rapidly
degenerated until, within a matter of minutes, I was on a dirt road and I passed
through a place that I couldn't even find on the map. It was a little village,
which, where there was a horse pulling a wagon and no overhead electrical lines
in sight. It was almost as if I had driven back through time into the 19th
century. There were log buildings.
Somewhere around there, something started to click, and as I drove back again
and the road improved and improved until finally I was on the superhighway, I
started working out just the mechanisms for the idea of driving through time,
which I used in road marks. Actually, by the time I got home, I had a number of
the situations worked out, and I sat down and began writing it. One of the
protagonists there, I think you read Dorokine. Yes. As in many of your stories,
or almost any narrative, the hero has a quest or a task. The way I took it, his
was to, he's running guns to the Greeks, I think it was, at Marathon.
I wasn't quite sure why he was doing that. Isn't that sort of a futile task?
Even if he succeeded, history wouldn't have been changed so much as another time
stream would have been created. He was trying to duplicate the earliest
situation that he remembered. He figured if he could find his way back to the
road or the parallel world variation thereof,
which was an image of the one on which he first found himself in his earliest
memories that he might, from that road, be able to find his way back home again.
I'm going to see.
Excuse me. And that basically was a part of it. By changing this one aspect of
history, there would be a kind of domino effect and he'd find himself back in
the earlier situation that he was looking for. And he was curious as to his own
origins and wanted to find his way back. I particularly like the guy that buries
the artifacts and then 2,000 years later digs them up again. That's great. The
dragons, I think the dragons of Belquinus, is that what they were called? Were
they modeled on or taken from any particular mythology or legend? that I wasn't
aware of or was that something of your own construction? They were simply to
represent the dark forces which I tend to bring in any fantasy novel in a story
like this there it has to be a point where you have to ultimately reach
something that's basically unexplainable uh namely where did the road come from
and uh how did it come to function the way that it did, and in making a decision
on that, I could go either way. I could find some science fiction trappings and
explain it, or I could leave it intentionally, something shadowy and with a more
fantasy background. If I did that, I decided I needed some symbol to invoke as
an ultimate creator of the road, so hence the dragons, and then their tie-in
with red. there is a movie script that was just written road marks I'll be able
to go over there as a matter of fact with no dragons
partly for technical reasons it's difficult to introduce a dragon we have
special effects when the focus of the whole movie isn't really on that and um
hmm Did you do the script yourself for that? No, a friend of mine did Casey St.
Charnus has scripted it Has that been sold? No Actually he did it on spec but
there is someone there's some interest in it he just finished scripting it I was
writing it last month. I just got a copy a few days ago. So there's really
nothing to say on it at this point. One of your other works has been turned into
a movie. Damnation Alley.
You didn't write the screenplay for that, I take it. No. A fellow named Lucas
Heller did originally. He was a fellow who wrote Hush Hush Sweet Charlotte.
Living in England at the time. I never met him, but they brought him back a
number of times to revise the script. And I received a copy of what was, it said
final script of it, and I read it, I liked it very much. And somewhere after
that, it was revised several more times. Apparently they weren't quite pleased
with it at the studio. Eventually another writer was given it, and he revised it
again. And I did not see any of these later revisions of the script. The one I
read I liked. And the one that was actually used as a basis for shooting was
different. They changed it rather drastically from your original novel. I guess
basically what's left in there is the long trek across the United States. Yeah.
But they lost your characterizations. The biker who's sort of been boxed into a
corner, he has to go across Damnation Alley. Right. Between Los Angeles and
Boston. He's been sort of forced into it. If he doesn't do it, he's going back
to jail. and
yes I was not overjoyed with the production
on the other hand I think Hemingway is the one who said that if you deal with
Hollywood you should stand on the other side of the California state line and
have them throw you the money and catch it and run which is usually when you
sell something to the movies. You expect a lot of changes.
You're not disappointed. They didn't disappoint you on that count. I thought
that was a rather unzelazney-like kind of a story. I think you wrote somewhere
where you'd read a book on the Hells Angels recently, and that was part of the
impetus for that. Was that sort of a mood piece? I wrote that very quickly, yes.
Less than a month. the oh I just like the notion there was nothing particularly
involved about it but if you wanted my thinking at all the only thing I had in
terms of the characterization or character development was a sort of a
consideration of the ideas to whether
is there much of a difference in terms of the ultimate effect or in ultimately
considering something as an act of heroism, if it's something done by a good
person for noble motives or if it's something done by a much
less nicer person for all the wrong reasons if the results are the same. In a
sense, they're still both heroes.
My character is not completely changed into a nice guy by anything he
experiences in the story. And beyond this small consideration in terms of the
way one looks at the results of an act, it was pretty much a travelogue with a
lot of shooting.
And I had no great pretensions about this as being anything more than that. was
just basically an action-adventure story, which I had fun writing.
And that's all to say about that. What kind of new works are you working on now,
can we ask? Well, let's see, I'll tell you. First of all, there are two books
coming out, one in April, this being 1981. a fantasy novel uh which valentine
will be doing called the changing land which is the first novel featuring a
character i used in a number of short stories over the years called uh dilvish
this is a pure sword and sorcery type fantasy and uh in october ace will be
doing another one of those large ace trade paperbacks uh titled mad wand one
word this being the sequel to Changeling, which came out last summer. Also
another fantasy. I am now doing something which is more straight science
fiction, though it does also involve mythological elements and touches that
might be considered fantasy here and there. It's a book called Eye of Cat, which
I am doing for pocketbooks, Simon & Schuster, which is set in the early 22nd
century, partly there, there being a map I'm pointing at on the floor of the
Navajo reservation, my main character being a Navajo Indian. And...
...so far so good. I'm pleased with the opening I've got. I just started work on
this book fairly recently. I hope to have it finished this spring.
Simultaneous with this, there is a book, which I'm currently doing in, well, I
haven't done a thing on it yet. He's starting in a book, which is going to be a
collaboration between Fred Saverhagen and myself, which we will hopefully have
finished by this summer. This is a straight science fiction as opposed to a
fantasy or any mixture thereof. Then once these two are out of the way I'm
considering the possibility of doing another Amber Book. I do have a number of
short things coming out the near future story being think about the the march
issue of omni called um the last of the wild ones which is a sequel to a story i
had published 15 years ago in galaxy called devil car and story coming up in the
next few months in isaac asimov science fiction magazine called Unicorn
Variation fantasy. I'm going to have something in the second issue of the
Twilight Zone magazine. It's a short, short fantasy.
And it seems to me there are a few other things which slipped my mind at the
moment. You mentioned a collaboration. Yes. You've already written one novel I
know of when you collaborated with Philip K. Dick, I believe it was. Yes. Is it
Deus Eri? Is that how it is? Deus Eri, yes. God of Wrath. So, was that your only
collaboration on a novel? That was, yes. I've done a few short things here and
there in collaboration. Are you satisfied with that kind of a work? How does
that work? I've never understood how two authors can really come out with a
book. Well, I'm very happy with that, yes. I suppose the only real reason for
doing a book with someone else rather than doing it yourself is that you
believe the final product will be something that neither one of you could have
done on its own. Hopefully it will not sound exactly like either of you. It will
be a sort of third voice. And now with De Osirre,
Phil couldn't quite finish it on his own and I had some thoughts on it, which
seemed to work in nicely, but I would never have originally conceived of a book
like this on my own. And we really did this, did the work through the mails. I
would write a section and show it to him, and he'd read it over and do another
section and show it to me, and we just proceeded through the book in that
fashion. I don't think it sounds like anything I ever did before, and Phil
doesn't feel it sounds exactly like anything of his.
I've always been sort of happy with that book and Phil says that he is too so
yeah I'm glad to have done that it's not the sort of thing I like to do all the
time but having had a good experience there and Fred Saberhagen being a very
good friend of mine and
thought it would be nice to try something with him on idea we both seem to find
congenial.
So I thought it'd be worth giving it a try one more time to see what comes of
it. I had just one more question on one of your works. I could think of a lot
more, but I think we're probably taking too much of your time on this. But, The
Last Defender of Camelot, the short story, my field is Middle English, and
Arthurian material so I was fascinated with that. The question I had was I got
the impression from that story and this is something that's always frustrated me
too that you wanted Lancelot to achieve the vision of the Holy Grail so you
decided to write a story in which he did achieve that vision. Well yes. As a
matter of fact you're right.
Yeah, that was a that was just a fun story it just came to me one day and I
wrote it quickly and And Saturday Evening Post asked me to cut it. And I didn't
really want to cut it. So it wound up elsewhere. I'm glad I didn't cut it. I
think it was just about the right length for something like that. And I liked
using the character. I have a sentimental attachment to that period myself.
Well, that's how it came about. Yes. It's fine. Should we just get on to some
other things in it? We still have some more about it as well. No, I'm fine.
Well, I had a couple of questions just about you've made some comments already,
which probably answers this in a way, but I guess your relation to science
fiction, if I can put it that way. Do you see yourself in it simply as a field
where you can most conveniently earn a living, Do you have some sort of a
mission or a crusade to bring things to people's attention? Some people, like
Norman Spenrad perhaps, want to make science fiction part of the mainstream.
It's a commitment, if I can put it that way. Do you have sort of a relationship?
Well, neither of the above, per se. My relationship really isn't. I mean, my
roots do go back to science fiction as I read it beginning at an early age. And
as with most people who read science fiction, I also, when I started, read it
backwards as well as forwards. I would pick up old magazines from the early 40s
and the 30s and I'd get books earlier in the century. And I
think I am a product of, in the sense, of all the science fiction traditions
which went to make up the area. I mean, the space opera is there. The hard
science, I feel it there sometimes, and the reaction to it, which came before
the so-called new wave, the sort of sociological science, that creeps into
sometimes. And then the period itself when I began writing the 60s, being what
they were, and the fact that I have not stopped reading science fiction and
trying to keep up with the area, which is getting harder and harder to do, So,
no, I actually do write it because I have a great fondness for it,
and I am familiar in general with all of the outlines of the field. You think
it's being neglected or that it should have more of a place, say, in the
classroom or the traditional literary mainstream, or is it something that
belongs in its own category? I don't know, this can be argued in a number of
ways, of course. There are those who say there was no separate genre of science
fiction until 1926 when Gernsbach published the first science fiction magazine
and had to call it something. The term eventually got coined. Before that, if H
.G. Wells had done a novel or Jules Verne, it would just be shelved in the
library along with all the other works of general fiction It might just be
called a scientific romance.
On the other hand, a
lot of stuff is published these days. That is science fiction that is not called
science fiction, depending on who writes it, of course. Back when On the Beach
was published, it wasn't published as science fiction. You can think of numerous
examples, and of course, in recent years, There have been science fiction novels
which have made the bestseller list, but it
is a special area for me.
It is, for one reason, And one of the few special places where you still deal
with characters other than those which occur in the modern realistic or
naturalistic novel. going back to the critic Northrop Frye who broke characters
into various modes, science fiction is one of the few places outside of say
modern poetry where a writer can deal with characters in what he called the high
mimetic or the mythic modes that is characters who are greater than their fellow
man or characters who are godlike sometimes in that science fiction does deal
with mutants and aliens and sentient computers and cyborgs and robots, what have
you. Just all categories of beings which are different than the characters you
meet with in a naturalistic or realistic novel. So in that sense, and I think
this is one of the great virtues of science fiction, it gives the writer more
scope for exploration in terms of character than just general fiction. So there
is if this does get injected and taken up by mainstream, I would be very
surprised really. I think that science fiction periodically undergoes
hits a peak. I think it's a cyclical thing that it is eventually taken up for a
while, considered, and then something new happens. I think it's more a matter of
fashion and taste than it is something enduring and i think it
is doubtless better known now than ever was before and it's history and it it
there will come a point i think when it's even better known but i i don't know
that it will ever ultimately be merged with the mainstream of fiction of course
the mainstream of fiction 50 years from now may sound like science fiction today
but that's a little bit different
Well, if I remember what... You wrote a piece for Galaxy, which was somewhat on
this topic, a column for Galaxy, where you said that in a sense science fiction
takes the place of the epic. That the mainstream literature of the novel is
realistic. That science fiction sort of is, I don't know if you meant it this
way, is an extension or survival of the epic tradition where you deal with
mythological creatures and larger than life human beings or things of that sort.
In other words, there is a separation in that sense. No, I still feel that way.
And despite the fact that this is present and that science fiction is dealing
what to people outside the area might look like a more grotesque or surrealistic
sort of thing, it's actually in many ways a more traditional thing than a lot of
things that have been going on in modern experimental writing. I mean, the new
wave never
went so far as
some writers, such as Fenesco or Beckett or Rob Grille. Even then, it was
introspective and it was occasionally surrealistic, but ultimately, all of the
things that were done by the new wave writers in the 60s were brought back into
the general area in the 70s which was sort of a period of synthesis. I mean we
still have the space operas of the 30s and 40s they're more sophisticated but
they're with us and we have people writing the hard science stories also Larry
Niven's a good example of a more sophisticated version of the hard science
stories we've got the Jose Fred Pole doing the sociological science fiction
story that was on the 50s and there are people still doing their 1960s things
experimentally but ultimately i think all these things got fed back and uh the
synthesis that came about in the 70s brought all of them together i think and
just enhanced the general level quality level of science fiction uh there are
new writers like say varley who uh combine all of these things um i think in a
way science Transfiction is old-fashioned in the same sense that... Let me think
of an example. I think much of modern fiction suffered as a result of M.
Forster's writing aspects of the novel back in the late 20s, where he as much as
said that the story is secondary It's kind of a hook on which to hang
psychological studies and games with ideas. And the book did make a big
impression on academics and filtered down through into general area of
criticism. And before that, writers were more traditional storytellers. I mean,
Alphonse Daudet was one of the most popular writers in the world back around the
1870s and 80s. And Anatole France was an extremely popular writer earlier in the
century. And John
Copper poesists hardly read today. And Dickens has other virtues which have
caused him to survive. But I mean, all four of them had in common the fact that
they were storytellers. And basically they had plots, stories with beginnings,
middles and ends. And this got to be a bit unfashionable in terms of higher
literature following aspects of the novel and various things that fed off of it.
I think that science fiction is still basically for all of the experimentation
that went out in the 60s a bastion of storytelling. the idea is not necessarily
the hero anymore as it was in the days Kingsley Amos referred to it as being
such back in the 40s and perhaps the 50s, but we have real characters now, and
ideas are handled in a more sophisticated fashion. The writing has also improved
from a stylistic standpoint, but basically I think if you looked at the area,
well even statistically, there are more examples of straightforward storytelling
in science fiction than you might find in general fiction at large. So that is
another reason I am very fond of science fiction because I am basically a
storyteller no matter what I do with mythology or writing devices.
And this may be one of the reasons that science fiction will not get total
academic acceptance. It, in this sense, will seem more naive than some of the
things being done by some of the more experimental writers in the world at
large.
To answer your question, from which I drifted a great distance, I don't think it
will necessarily be merged with the mainstream, and I uh also do not think that
this is necessarily a bad thing at all uh it was santayana who said that uh
about something else entirely but which i think is apropos that to attempt to
give such things a wide currency is to be willing to denature them in order to
boast that they've been propagated and i think science fiction will always have
its devotees and that they uh that they will grow in number just as the
population itself increases but I don't know that the percentage is ever going
to increase that greatly
that answered a lot of my questions we answered almost all of them there go
ahead I have some more you guys go ahead we're about to roll through the last
part of this tape Um um
you've written both science fiction and fantasy, which do you enjoy more
writing? Ah, it's like George Zell used to say about Brahms I went to my
undergraduate work at Western Reserve which has the Severance Hall, the home of
the Cleveland Symphony right on campus and uh I remember our music appreciation
professor once asked him which of Brahms symphonies he preferred, and he always
said the one I just finished conducting. It's sort of that way. I mean, whatever
I'm writing at the moment, that's what I'm most wrapped up in. Looking back, I
don't know that I have a prejudice that much one way or the other. Ultimately, I
suppose it would be some sort of marriage of the two, a science fiction story
where I get a few fantasy elements in, sort of sneak them in through the back
door I like to do this just because I think that however distorted an image of
life you use for a science fiction story I mean by projecting something into the
future or a parallel world or what have you you are still showing the human
condition that everyone is familiar with and in everyone's experience no matter
what they know there are certain things that they do not know it does not mean
that the things they do not know are ultimately unexplainable. It just means
there are certain dark areas or pockets of not knowing in their life. And I
think that this should be reflected in a piece of fiction for it to have
verisimilitude. So I intentionally like to leave little dark areas in my story
where things may be explainable, but I don't explain them just because this
imitates life and those are the little nooks and crannies and places where I
like to put in a touch of mythological or fantasy type images or possibilities
they may be real, they may not be but I so I like them both I suppose ultimately
I like to see them both together some way would it be fair to ask you if you
have any particularly favorite works yeah I guess I have a great sentimental
attachment to my first book this immortal I think in some ways my best book is
Lord of Light that's because I put an awful lot of work into that and I was
happy with the way it came out and if I had to name a third one I would say
Doorways in the Sand which I also enjoy writing quite a bit among shorter
Another piece I like for a breath I tarry. I think I'll stop there.
Are you surprised that your own works have become popular? Were you more or
less, did you know they were going to be successful when you started? I think
every writer I know has this thing most people would consider an ego trip where
he considers himself great and unrecognized and someday the world will know
better. But I think one of the things in writing, as in many other things, is a
matter of persistence and staying power. If you write and are published steadily
and your name is there, more people eventually will read it and there will come
a point where you will be known if you stay with it, as I have done. So I
figured that if I did someday, I would be known.
Beyond that, I don't know. It's nice when something catches on, like the way the
Amber books did. I'm sure that feels good to get a lot of fan mail or if
somebody want a movie option on something.
Various foreign publishers want foreign rights on something. you feel maybe
you're reaching a number of people who enjoy it yeah it does feel good I was
going to say in the opinion of many people myself included I think that you are
now and will be remembered as one of the greater writers in the field is there
anything in particular that you want to be remembered for in your body of work
sometime in the future when it's completed is there anything in particular that
you would like to be known as or remembered for or whatever? Or is that a fair
question to ask an author? I guess it's fair but I'm not sure I have an answer.
No, it's I don't know, it's not that simple if it were something you could just
state in a few words I suppose I suppose I'd write an essay saying these These,
I think, are standards and values that people should think about, and this and
that. But really, I don't know,
I tend to express myself by analogy, and I don't really have a good parable here
at any point.
No, people change.
I don't know that I the things I look look to do in writing ten or fifteen years
ago are the same as the things I I'm looking to do now but there are
similarities and it'll probably take me a book to try to figure them out and
explain them so I can't answer that one I have to beg the question well just
perhaps just i would say you know bringing enjoyment to people telling a story
you see yourself as a storyteller um oh yeah yeah if uh no i thought you were uh
saying is there some burning message for mankind but uh oh no uh i uh i enjoy
telling stories and i like i want to be read sure uh not just for the royalties
i Hope I can give people some enjoyment. And I hope I never fall into a complete
rot. I know that there are similarities in characters, and I hope that I keep
changing sufficiently so that my stories and my storytelling abilities evolve so
that I can keep people amused for a long time and entertained. Yeah, there's
that. Thank you.
Well, one other question. Do you have any more questions? Oh, yeah. there's two.
Oh, OK. Number one. Do you have much, or do you do any writing in response to
fans, either fans at conventions or letters or so forth? I remember Princess
Larry Niven said that he'd written the Ring World Engineers because of fan
pressure, not pressure, but so forth. Do you do any kind of writing at all
because of fans? isn't it? sort of unique in that there is a relationship there
between the writers and the fans, especially at the conventions and so forth.
Um, I see what you mean. I have never that I can think of offhand written a
specific story in response to anything like that. But on the other hand, like I
mentioned earlier, that the Amber books brought a lot of response in the way of
letters. Now, some of them raised some good points about things I had either
neglected intentionally or inadvertently and different things that they would
like to see explained somewhere in the series, which I have yet to explain. At
some point, I began saving some of these letters. And I think if I were to
continue the series, I would review them and see how many of those I considered
valid. And they might condition some of the things I would say in another book,
at least to the point where I feel if someone's gone to the trouble of reading
five books in a series, I might take a few paragraphs to satisfy their curiosity
as to a few things somewhere in the course of the sixth book. So, yeah, it's
possible that's an instance of what you were asking about. David, do you want
one more? Just a general question about science fiction fans. One thing, I think
it's kind of unique in the fact that most science fiction authors were at one
time science fiction fans who became science fiction authors and now have
science fiction fans.
That's pretty good.
Most people I know who write science fiction, there are a few exceptions, but
most of them started out in early ages. I did reading, and I also did edit a
fanzine briefly in the early 50s.
And in that sense, I suppose it is an incestuous little area where there are
only a few hundred science fiction writers doing all the material, and all of
them know one another. At any given convention, a number of them will be present
and talk to one another as well as to the fans gathered around there, and ideas
do get bounced around and enjoy considerable currency.
offhand I can't think of any other area of writing that has this peculiar
feedback set up I mean mystery writers do get together for their own banquets
but there's no big mystery fandom in the way there is a science fiction fandom
or western fandom either it's kind of peculiar in the sense that you do get that
response to what you've written.